Doc: Clean documentation for WAN (#3665)
aristanetworks/ansible-avd: ansible_collections/arista/avd/roles/eos_designs/docs/how-to/wan.md

---
# This title is used for search results
title: Ansible Collection Role eos_designs - WAN
---
<!--
  ~ Copyright (c) 2023-2024 Arista Networks, Inc.
  ~ Use of this source code is governed by the Apache License 2.0
  ~ that can be found in the LICENSE file.
  -->

# WAN

!!! warning

    Some of the WAN functionality is still in PREVIEW. When this is the case it is indicated as such in the documentation.
    For these PREVIEW features, Everything is subject to change, is not supported and may not be complete.

    If you have any questions, please leverage the GitHub [discussions board](https://github.com/aristanetworks/avd/discussions)

!!! info

    `eos_cli_config_gen` schema should support all of the required keys to configure a WAN network, whether AutoVPN or Pathfinder except for the most recent features.

>     This means that any missing eos_designs feature should be supported using `custom_structured_configuration` functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This means that any missing `eos_designs` feature should be supported using `custom_structured_configuration` functionality.
```

    If you find any missing functionality, please open an issue on Github.

## Overview

> 

Reviewer: Maybe we should add some link to an overview of autovpn vs cv pathfinder. "Please familiarize yourself with the Arista WAN terminology before proceeding." or something

Author: Good point - I had a link historically but it is borken for AutoVPN - not sure what to point to...

Author: Added what is available for now - TBC discussing with Fred and Fan

Author: ok for now

### Design points

- When deploying CV Pathfinder, the assumption is that the deployment is using CVaaS.
- The intent is to be able to support having the different WAN participating devices in different inventories.
- Only iBGP is supported as an overlay_routing_protocol.

> - On the AutoVPN Route Reflectors and Pathfinders, a listen range statement is used for BGP to allow for distributed inventories.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- On the AutoVPN Route Reflectors and Pathfinders, a listen range statement is used for BGP to allow for distributed Ansible inventories.
```

> - The default VRF is being configured by default on all WAN devices with a `wan_vni` of 1. To override this, it is necessary to configure the `default` VRF in a tenant in `network_services`.

Reviewer: Is this still true?
```suggestion
- VRF `default` is being configured by default on all WAN devices with a `wan_vni` of 1. To override this, it is necessary to configure VRF `default` in a tenant in `network_services`.
```

- Path-group ID `65535` is reserved for the path-group called `LAN_HA`.

### Features in PREVIEW

- WAN HA is in PREVIEW

>   - For HA, the considered interfaces are only the `uplink_interfaces` in VRF default. It is possible to disable HA under node settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - While HA is in preview, it is required to either enable or disable HA if exactly two WAN routers are in one node group.
  - For HA, the considered interfaces are only the `uplink_interfaces` in VRF default.
```

### Future work

- HA support out of PREVIEW
- New LAN scenarios (L2 port-channel, HA for L2 `lan` using VRRP..)
- HA for AutoVPN
- WAN Internet exit
- `import path-group` functionality
- Indirect connectivity to pathfinder
- BGP peerings on WAN L3 interfaces and associated route filtering.
- Extra STUN server for a given path-group not connected to pathfinder
- Auto generation of Path-group IDs and other IDs.
- Proper OSPF-BGP redistribution in VRF default.
- Support for OSPF subinterfaces for `p2p-vrfs`.
- Increase test coverage in `eos_validate_state` support for AutoVPN and CV-Pathfinder
- Path selection outlier detection feature

## Getting started with WAN

!!! warning "Disclaimer"

    This section does not intend to be a network design nor a best practice document.
    It is about how to deploy a WAN network using AVD.

### Global settings

!!! tip

    These global settings must be the same for every WAN device participating
    in the WAN network.

    When using multiple inventories, the recommendation is

>     to use Global Variables, for instance leveraging the `arista.avd.global_vars`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    to include these variables from a common source, for instance leveraging the `arista.avd.global_vars`
```

| `wan_mode` | ✅ |  Two possible modes, `autovpn` and `cv-pathfinder` (default) |
| `wan_virtual_topologies` | ✅ |  to define the Policies and the VRF to policy mappings |
| `wan_path_groups` | ✅ |  to define the list of path-groups in the network |
| `wan_carriers` | ✅ |  to define the list of carriers in the network, each carrier is assigned to a path-group |
| `wan_ipsec_profiles` | ✅ |  to define the shared key for the Control Plane and Data Plane IPSec profiles. |
| `cv_pathfinder_regions` | ✅ |  to define the Region/Zone/Site hierarchy, not required for AutoVPN. |
| `tenants` | ✅ |  the default tenant key from `network_services` or any other key for tenant that would hold some WAN VRF informaiton |
| `wan_stun_dtls_disable` | ✅ |  disable dTLS for STUN for instance for lab. (**NOT** recommended in production) |
| `application_classification` | ✅ |  to define the specific traffic classification required for the WAN if any. |
| `wan_route_servers` | ✘|  Indicate to which WAN route servers the WAN router should connect to. This key is also used to tell every WAN Route Reflectors with which other RRs it should peer with. |

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `wan_route_servers` | ✘|  Indicate to which WAN route servers the WAN router should connect to. This key is also used to tell every WAN Route Reflectors with which other RRs it should peer with. |
| `ipv4_acls` | ✘|  List of IPv4 access-lists to be assigned to WAN interfaces. |

```

Additionally, following keys must be set for the WAN route servers for the connectivity to work:

> - `bgp_peer_groups.wan_overlay_peers.listen_range_prefixes`: To set the ranges of IP address from which to expect BGP peerings for the WAN.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `bgp_peer_groups.wan_overlay_peers.listen_range_prefixes`: To set the ranges of IP address from which to expect BGP peerings for the WAN. Include the VTEP ranges for all routers connecting to this patfinder.
```

#### WAN mode

AVD supports two design types for WAN:

- AutoVPN
- CV Pathfinder

By default the mode is set to `cv-pathfinder` and can be changed using:

```yaml
---

> wan_mode: autovpn | cv-pathfinder

Reviewer: ```suggestion
wan_mode: autovpn # default: cv-pathfinder
```

Author: ```suggestion
wan_mode: autovpn | cv-pathfinder # default: cv-pathfinder
```

```

#### WAN node_types

There are two built-in node types for WAN:

- `wan_router`: WAN routers can be AutoVPN edges, CV Pathfinder edges or transits.
- `wan_rr`: WAN route servers, used for the AutoVPN RRs and CV Pathfinder Pathfinder nodes.

#### WAN route servers

The AVD model for WAN has been built with the intention that it should be possible to have the different WAN routers in different inventories.

The top level `wan_route_servers` allow to indicate to which AutoVPN RRs or to which Pathinders node the routers should connect to. The key can be different per region for instance.

```yaml
 WAN routers with this configuration will establish static peerings towards pf1 and pf2 and the common path-groups.
wan_route_servers: # (1)!
  - hostname: pf1
  - hostname: pf2
```

> 1. A `wan_router` with this configuration will establish BGP peering to all the wan_route_servers in the list if it has a common path-group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. A `wan_router` with this configuration will establish BGP peering to all the `wan_route_servers` in the list if it has a common path-group.
```

>     A `wan_rr` with this configuration will establish BPG peerings to every other wan_route_servers in the list if they have a common path-group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    A `wan_rr` with this configuration will establish BGP peerings to every other `wan_route_servers` in the list if they have a common path-group.
```

!!! note

>     It is recommended to always have at least 2 WAN route servers for redundancy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It is recommended to always have at least 2 WAN route servers for redundancy and at least one WAN route server in each path group.
```

> When the WAN route servers are part of the same inventory, each WAN routers in the inventory is able to pick up the required information to generate the configuration from the inventory device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the WAN route servers are part of the same inventory, each WAN router in the inventory is able to pick up the required information to generate the configuration from the inventory device.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

However, if the WAN route servers are in a different inventory, it is then necessary to add some information under the `wan_route_servers` key entry. AVD will raise an error if any required information to generate the configuration is missing. Note that the configuration under `wan_route_servers` takes precedence over what AVD could derive from the device if it is in the same inventory.

#### WAN STUN handling

!!! Danger "TODO"

#### CV Pathfinder hierarchy

> When deploying CV Pathfinder, it is required to define a hierarchy using the top
> level key `cv_pathfinder_regions` in order to then be able to allocat a region
> and a site to each WAN routers in the node settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When deploying CV Pathfinder, it is required to define a WAN hierarchy grouping WAN sites in WAN regions using the top
level key `cv_pathfinder_regions`. Furthermore each WAN router must be assigned to a region and site in the node settings.
```

An example hierarchy looks like:

```yaml
cv_pathfinder_regions:
  - name: Region_1
    id: 1
    description: AVD Region 1
    sites:
      - name: Site11
        id: 11
        location: Somewhere
      - name: Site12
        id: 12
        location: Somewhere else
  - name: Region_2
    id: 2
    description: AVD Region 2
    sites:
      - name: Site11
        id: 11
      - name: Site21
        id: 21
```

!!! Note
    Site IDs and names must be unique per region.

And then for each `wan_router`:

```yaml
wan_router:
  nodes:
    - name: EDGE1
      cv_pathfinder_region: Region_1
      cv_pathfinder_site: Site11
```

> For Pathfinders (`wan_rr`), it is possible to set the `cv_pathfinder_region` key. It is not rendered in configuration but leveraged in Cloudvision for the visualization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Pathfinders (`wan_rr`), it is possible to set the `cv_pathfinder_region` key. It is not rendered in configuration but leveraged in CloudVision for the visualization.
```

#### WAN carriers and path-groups

> Path-groups are used to define overlays over the various providers a WAN network can use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Path-groups are used to define overlays over the various network transports a WAN can use.
```

In AVD, the list of desired path-groups must be defined the same across all WAN participating routers using the following top level key.

```yaml
wan_path_groups:
  - name: MPLS
    ipsec:
      static_peers: false
      dynamic_peers: false
    dps_keepalive:
      interval: 300
    id: 100
  - name: INET
    id: 101
  - name: LTE
    excluded_from_default_policy: true # (1)!
    id: 102
  - name: Equinix
    default_preference: alternate # (2) !
    id: 103
  - name: Satellite
    id: 104
```

> 1. The expectation here is that LTE shouldn't be present in automatically generated Load Balance policy(ies).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The expectation here is that LTE shouldn't be present in automatically generated load balance policies.
```

> 2. This controls the preference allocated to the Path-group in a Load Balance policy when no preference is specified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. This controls the preference allocated to the path-group in a load balance policy when no preference is specified.
```

!!! note

>     The IDs are required and it is possible to turn on and off ipsec at the path-group level for dynamic or static peers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The IDs are required and it is possible to turn on and off IPSec at the path-group level for dynamic or static peers.
```

> To allow for a better visualization in CVaaS, AVD implements on level of indirection to be able to specify the Carrier for the last mile provider.

Reviewer: This also now allows for per-carrier settings like trusted...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To allow for a better visualization in CVaaS, AVD implements on level of indirection to be able to specify the carrier for the last mile provider.
```

Each carrier is associated to a path-group and multiple carriers can be assigned to the same path-group (e.g. all the Internet providers can be differentiated at the carrier level but bundled together at the path-group level).

The list of carriers must also be the same across all WAN routers:

```yaml
wan_carriers:
  - name: IPS-1
    path_group: INET

>     # AVD won't require an ACL for a trusted WAN carrier

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # AVD won't require an interface ACL on WAN interfaces towards a trusted WAN carrier
```

Reviewer: maybe it would be better to have this example on one of the MPLS providers.

    trusted: true
  - name: ISP-2
    path_group: INET
  - name: MPLS-SP1
    path_group: MPLS
  - name: MPLS-SP2
    path_group: MPLS
  - name: LTE-5G-SP
    path_group: LTE
  - name: Satellite-SP
    path_group: Satellite
```

### Flow tracking

> For scalabilty reasons, flow-tracking is enabled only on Dps1 interface by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For scalabilty reasons, flow-tracking is enabled only on `Dps1` interface by default.
```

It can be added on WAN and LAN interfaces using `custom_structured_configuration`.

### WAN interfaces

> A WAN interface in AVD is defined under the node settings under the `l3_interfaces` list. To be considered as a WAN interface by AVD, the l3_interface must have the `wan_carrier` key defined (which will allow to detect the path-group thanks to the carrier to path-group mapping). The `wan_circuit_id` is optional and used on CVaaS to provide more information in the visualization as well as in the AVD generated interface description. Finally the key `connected_to_pathfinder` allows to disable the static peering configuration on a given path-group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A WAN interface in AVD is defined under the node settings under the `l3_interfaces` list. To be considered as a WAN interface by AVD, the `l3_interface` must have the `wan_carrier` key defined (which will allow to detect the path-group thanks to the carrier to path-group mapping). The `wan_circuit_id` is optional and used on CVaaS to provide more information in the visualization as well as in the AVD generated interface description. Finally the key `connected_to_pathfinder` allows to disable the static peering configuration on a given path-group.
```

Reviewer: maybe some newlines could help :)

!!! Danger

>     The WAN interfaces may be connected directly to the Internet, it is the user responsability to craft the ACLs required to ensure only the expected traffic is accepted and sent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The WAN interfaces may be connected directly to the Internet, it is the user's responsibility to craft the ACLs required to ensure only the expected traffic is accepted and sent.
```

```yaml
wan_router:
  defaults:
    loopback_ipv4_pool: 192.168.42.0/24
    vtep_loopback_ipv4_pool: 192.168.142.0/24
    uplink_ipv4_pool: 172.17.0.0/16
    bgp_as: 65000
    cv_pathfinder_region: Region_1
    cv_pathfinder_site: Site11
    nodes:
      - name: cv-pathfinder-edge
        id: 1
        uplink_switch_interfaces: [Ethernet1]
        l3_interfaces:

>           # This is a WAN interface because `wan_carrier` is defined

Reviewer: the example should include ipv4_acl_in/out

- The `application_virtual_topologies` entries and the `default_virtual_topology` key are used to create the policy match statement, the AVT profile (when `wan_mode` is CV Pathfinder) and the load balancing policy.
- The `default_virtual_topology` is used as the default match in the policy.  To prevent configuring it, the `drop_unmatched` boolean must be set to `true` otherwise, at least one `path-group` must be configured or AVD will raise an error.
- Policies are assigned to VRFs using the list `wan_virtual_topologies.vrfs`. A policy can be reused in multiple VRFs.
- If no policy is assigned for the `default` VRF policy, AVD auto generates one with one `default_virtual_topology` entry configured to use all available local path-groups.
- For the policy defined for VRF `default` (or the auto-generared one), an extra match statement is injected in the policy to match the traffic towards the Pathfinders or AutoVPN RRs, the name of the application-profile is hardcoded as `APP-PROFILE-CONTROL-PLANE`. A special policy is created by appending `-WITH-CP` at the end of the targetted policy name.

> - For a given application profile match in a WAN policy, if the path-groups in the input data have an empty intersection with the path-groups on the device (no common path-group), the match statement / AVT profile is **NOT** configured on the device. This implies that the traffic could be matched in one of the following application profiles or the default virtual topology. Note that the default virtual topology can be configured to drop traffic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For the policy defined for VRF `default` (or the auto-generated one), an extra match statement is always injected in the policy to match the traffic towards the Pathfinders or AutoVPN RRs. The name of the injected application-profile is hardcoded as `APP-PROFILE-CONTROL-PLANE`. A special policy is created by appending `-WITH-CP` at the end of the targeted policy name.
```

  policies:
    - name: PROD-AVT-POLICY  # (3)!
      default_virtual_topology: # (4)!
        path_groups:
          - names: [INET]
            preference: preferred
          - names: [MPLS]
            preference: alternate
      application_virtual_topologies:
        - application_profile: VOICE # (5)!
          lowest_hop_count: true
          path_groups:
            - names: [MPLS]
              preference: preferred
            - names: [INET]
              preference: alternate
          constraints: # (6)!
            delay: 120
            jitter: 20
            loss_rate: 0.3
          id: 2 # (7)!
        - application_profile: VIDEO
          path_groups:
            - names: [MPLS, LTE]
              preference: preferred
            - names: [INET]
              preference: alternate
          constraints:
            loss_rate: 42.0
          id: 4
        # This will not be rendered on devices without MPLS
        - application_profile: MPLS-ONLY # (8)!
          path_groups:
            - names: [MPLS]
              preference: preferred
          id: 5
```

1. Assign the `PROD-AVT-POLICY` to the `PROD` VRF, multiple VRFs can use the same policy.

> 2. The `default` VRF will use the AVD auto-generated `DEFAULT-POLICY` as no policy is set.

Author: ```suggestion
2. VRF `default` will use the AVD auto-generated `DEFAULT-POLICY` as no policy is set.
```

> 3. Define the `PROD-AVT-POLICY`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. VRF `default` will use the AVD auto-generated `DEFAULT-POLICY` as no policy is set.
```

Author: wrong line

Author: ```suggestion
3. Define the `PROD-AVT-POLICY`
```

4. `default_virtual_topology` is used to configure the default match in the policy.
    In this case, default traffic will use INET path-group first and MPLS as backup.
5. This list element configures the policy to apply to traffic the `VOICE` application profile.
   This block of configuration will configure the Load Balance policy, the match statement in the policy (in `router path-selection` for AutoVPN or `router adaptive-virtual-topology` for CV-Pathfinder) and for CV-Pathfinder, the AVT profile.
   The application profile must be defined under `application_classification.application_profiles`.
   The Load Balance policy will favor direct path over multihop path (`lowest_hop_count`).
   MPLS is prefered over the INET path-group.

> 6. The contraints are applied on the load-balance policy. If the delay, jitter or loss rate of a given path-selection path

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. The constraints are applied on the load-balance policy. If the delay, jitter or loss-rate of a given path-selection path
```

   exceeds the defined criteria, the path is avoided and the remaining ECMP paths are used or the next path in line meeting
   the constraints is used.
7. The `id` is used as the AVT profile ID in the configuration.
8. The `MPLS-ONLY` application profile won't be rendered on devices not having this path-group.

### LAN Designs

!!! danger "VRF default routing"

>     An important design point to keep in mind is that the current CV Pathfinder and AutoVPN solutions require the Dps1 interface to be in VRF default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    An important design point to keep in mind is that the current CV Pathfinder and AutoVPN solutions require the `Dps1` interface to be in VRF default.
```

>     This implies that all the WAN interfaces live in default VRF and the LAN interfaces also have subnets in the default VRF.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This implies that all the WAN interfaces will also be in VRF `default` and there may also be LAN interfaces in VRF `default`.
```

!!! warning

>     AVD does not yet configure any route-map to filter potential routes received

Reviewer: well all this is not really relevant as long as we don't support dynamic routing on the WAN interfaces...

Author: removing - we can add back later once we do support it

    from the WAN for a WAN interface purpose (e.g. internet) to be advertised
    towards the LAN. The plan is to add an inbound route-map set the
    no-advertise community on the received routes.

>     Similarly there is no current prevention to prevent advertising the LAN routes towards the WAN,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Similarly there is no current mechanism to prevent advertising the LAN routes towards the WAN,
```
